+++
title = "Hello, world"
date = "2024-02-27"
+++

# A brief introduction

When I launched this site about a year ago, I wanted an easy-to-use static site
generator that took Markdown source content and a theme that looked clean,
minimal, and had a dark theme toggle. At the time of writing this, you're
looking at a static site generated with [Zola](https://www.getzola.org) using
the [apollo](https://github.com/not-matthias/apollo) theme. I'm really happy
with the way it turned out; however, I think the theme is doing most of the
legwork.

The theme template contained a blog that I never bothered removing. I wasn't
motivated enough to remove it but I wasn't motivated enough to write anything
either. That is, until I wrote a detailed description of a bug in a
several-decade-old application I maintain at my job. The review documented the
problem, its effect, and possible solutions. It was extremely boring, but it
needed to be done. After it was all said and done, the fix was actually quite
simple: make sure a file exists before performing some business logic.

After my coworker read my diatribe, he complimented my writing and said I could
write technical blogs. Every once in a while, an idea pops into my head and I
think to myself, "This would be a good topic for a blog post". However, as
quickly as the excitement of fleshing out a new idea arises, it just as quickly
dissipates and is replaced with the dread of imposter syndrome. His words - as
trivial as they might have sounded - gave me the confidence and motivation to
start writing.

I don't want to promise too much, but I would like to jot things down here at
least somewhat regularly. I plan on writing about things that interest me,
mostly technical in nature, but I also reserve the right to change it up
whenever I feel like it. Also, I don't intend on any of my posts to be
educational. They are purely for my own enjoyment and personal gratification.
